The question though for us, is you listen in to that conversation.
Thats not it, thats not it.  Because you want the government to follow up whos involved with terrorism, whos in touch with members of the al Qaeda.  My biggest concern for us and the concern with this illegal domestic spying program is in effect, it violates the basic rules of the road, of how you get those intercepts.
But we count [sounds like] on those powers, even during times of war.  The other areas where youve decided before:  Lincoln suspending habeas corpus or the Japanese American internment.  Those were mista0kes.  Those were mistakes that now Republican and Democratic presidents alike say that those were blotches on otherwise illustrious careers of presidents.
Marvin, I would also add that I think phrasing the question as are we or are we not at war is really a side question of the larger debate we are now engaged in.  You can argue this is a different type of war, that the soldier are on our home field, that the enemy uses our openness as sword and shield, and this is a war without end.  This will never come to a conclusive ending like the Second World War did.  But whats really at stake is not whether or not were at war; its whether or not the President violated the law.  It is very explicit.
Let me interject and, with enormous respect, disagree with my mentor Larry Tribe about the standing issue because we have to be optimists.  At the ACLU, we wouldnt be able to do our work unless we were optimistic.  We dont tilt at windmills; theres too much to do.  We did file a lawsuit about a month ago challenging that the NSA spying program was illegal as you read the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, and unconstitutional when you read the First and Fourth Amendments.  What we came up with was perhaps not as negative or pessimistic of a reading of the standing issue.  I went to the inferior school of Stanford on the West coast.  I didnt have Larry Tribe as my professor, but I had some very fine professors.
It is also about checks and balances.  The framers were as smart as Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon and all the rest.  They realize that the person in the seat of power is by nature going to think that which is in the national interest are what that persons interests advances.  It seems to me thats why we have checks and balances.  Thats why we do not believe that the bleaker view of the person in the White House, which is predictably always going to blur those lines, ought to be the last word.
Yeah, absolutely.
Some would argue that taking so long was an irresponsible decision, though, Marvin.
Ive never been a journalist.  Ive been many things.
But there have also been journalists who have criticized the New York Times, including its own public editor, Byron Calame, who wrote a brilliant piece criticizing the Times for sitting on it as long as it did and not explaining it.
Oh, well have many, Im sure.  Well have lunch.
Im glad that it must be a card-carrying member who asked that question.
As long as they go to a judge to get the warrant, it would be perfectly fine.
And I guess my role is also to play the optimist on the panel.  I completely agree with Mr. Dean, although I do think that the events of the last several weeks give one, again, some renewed sense of optimism.  The fact that the concerns have been raised among Republicans like Pat Roberts in todays Washington Post or New York Times, raising some of the questions; its a beginning.  I agree with you that the glass is not full, but its getting full -- the fact that you have Olympia Snowe and Chuck Hagel and others whove begun to raise these questions.  I think Senator Specter did a very fine job of trying to hold the Attorney General and nail his feet to the floor and just not let him wriggle out of very difficult, vexing questions at the hearings last week.
But, Marvin, I would add that he has not done that in this instance.
He has not given, as I read the executive orders, the Vice President the power to declassify information.  When Cheney was interviewed, he said that he could declassify, and then halted himself; then he went and reported that he had now authority to classify material and the amended executive orders back in 2003.  He does not have power of declassification, nor does the President for that matter if he doesnt follow the procedures.  U.S. vs. Nixon made it very clear that a president just cant unilaterally take a set of regulations and executive orders and declassify them at that point.  He has to follow the procedures or he has to eliminate and issue a new executive order.
But I think the points are raised, I think for our discussions today, is the fact that you have to connect the dots.  Forget about him collecting the dots.  Connect the dots on all these different places where they have exerted executive power in a way that is unprecedented.  We talk about the domestic spying program, an illegal spying program that accesses American citizens without judges and without Congress in the seat.  You have the abuse of executive power in the context of designating American citizens as enemy combatants on American soil, denying them access to lawyers and without charge.  You have the abuse of executive power in the context of saying that individuals apprehended in the war are not going to afforded the protections of the Geneva Convention, in violation of domestic international laws that bind this government.
America is strong enough to fight terrorism.  We have a system of checks and balances that works well.  We have three branches of government that have to work together for the same goals.  No one branch of government is predominant or preeminent over the other.  As we think about what it is were fighting for, some core values for me are equality, due process, and being innocent until proven guilty.  Those are what define us as Americans.  Thats what I feel when I look at the American flag, or when Im celebrating Presidents Day at George Washington University.  I want to know that the country is much bigger than any one founding president.
