Ill say this.  If you accept the characterization that the Cato Institute is conservative, you probably have talked to many conservatives recently.  I like to think were off the charts.  In the work that Ive done with the Department of Homeland Security data privacy and integrity advisory committee, some of the most important things weve looked at are risks.  When a program like secure flight or checkpoints is proposed, what risks do they address and how well do they address them?  I dont speak for the committee entirely, but one of the most important things we can do is have a conversation about risk.  The premise of the legal arguments about the Presidents inherent authority, the scope of FISA, the authorization of military force, and the Fourth Amendment question is that we are in a state of war.  This is obviously a very different war than any weve encountered before.  Its not objectively verifiable at any given time.  Theres no space where shooting is happening regularly.  We need more information and a better conversation about what is actually happening in order to address the reality.
Its easy to over-read my point.  My point is not that there shouldnt be any secrecy at all; but there needs to be a more careful and limited use of secrecy.  Frankly, the domestic soil of the U.S. is where the war is taking place.  The front line troops are the American citizens, and people doing their jobs.  With more information, they might be better able to [indiscernible] terrorists.  Theres a security rationale and a legal rationale for more openness and discussion about the nature of the threat to us today.
Well, weve only had five Declarations of War in our history.  Its been recognized that when the United States is attacked, repelling such an attack neednt await a Declaration of War.  Im not among those that think because the authorization of military force didnt call itself the Declaration of War, that somehow the entire war in Iraq violates the Constitution.  It may have been procured by fraud.  Maybe there was impeachable offense there, but I think the absence of a declaration is not crucial.  What is crucial, however, is that Congress has decided that certain threats to privacy  phone calls, and emails read and mined  cannot be treated as simply an inevitable side-effect even of a declaration.  When Congress said theyre going to look at electronic surveillance, it said that after fifteen days you have to get a check, even when war is declared.
He only had one.  Maybe it was the President.  The point is, it used to be the case that the President could declassify information for important national security reasons.  Giving the Vice President power to declassify information selectively and not for security reasons, is an example of the kind of porous transparency that we do not need.  We need some meaningful accountability so that we can measure the threat.  I think were threatened by terrorism, but I feel more threatened by the fact that the cargo under the plane I flew here in from Boston may not have been checked, than I do from someone looking like Muslim wasnt listened to by George Bush.
Its an unfortunate and wonderful part of being an American that we protect privacy for any reason, or no reason.  The premise of privacy and individual rights is not necessarily on their functional utility, but on the fact that individuals want to keep it.  Thats the most important reason I know of for privacy.  The question of data mining is a fascinating one and I think Mary and I, who disagree on many things, are both interested in finding out exactly what is being done.
Sure.  Data mining is an idea; even the definition is difficult to pin down.  The idea is that you might be able to go into a mass of data and comb through it in some way with algorithms to find new evidence to anticipate terrorism.  With the right algorithms and a large enough mass of data, you might find anomalies or some pattern that leads you to new information.  Were working on this and were all thinking about it.  The best thinking Ive got at this point is that data mining of this type is almost theoretically proven impossible.
Ive done enough to make sure that I get a wealth of angry emails from conservatives, so I want to do something to get me a wealth of angry emails from liberals -- and disagree with the assumption of arrogance on the part of the Bush administration.
Honestly believe that quality
I think they believed both.
Theyve gotten more than 1100 pages even on me, and Im not a terrorist.  But they want to know who youre going to sue and when, they want to prepare for these lawsuits so they can file the papers saying you have no standing.  Thats why they want to...
To be interesting, I want to point out the fact that the next terrorist attack may well come not from al Qaeda or some affiliated group but again like ten years ago from some source domestically.  Professor Tribe may change his mind at any time.
It well could be.  We dont know, because its secret and I believe the Attorney General signaled to us that there are secret programs beyond the one that were talking about now.  So its unclear exactly what this is.
Its completely offline, yes.  Its a secret budget.  And there are programs, something like thirteen different data mining programs in different agencies that we know of, thanks to the government accountability officer four years ago.
To elect a different Congress.
Yes.  Yes, whoever asked the question.
One of the most interesting things to me in my study of terrorism is the fact that its a tactic.  Its as important to communicate about terrorism as it is to suppress terrorist attacks.  We hope the London and Madrid bombings never happen anyplace ever again, but they killed about the number of people that die on the highways of the United States on an average long weekend.  Are we in mortal fear of dying on the highways?  No, because we have a general understanding of those risks and people communicate those to us.  We accept a lot of those risks rationally.  Good communication about the terrorist threat would help suppress the effect of terrorism in the United States.  Briefly, I can give you two examples of communications that worked and didnt work.
If the professor wanted to talk about this a security dilemma, hed be exactly right.
You know, the administration argues that the authorization to use military force gives it more power than a Declaration of War would.  Under a Declaration of War, the FISA says that the power to engage in warrantless wire-tapping expires in fifteen days.  The administration says they can see that, but this authorization was not a Declaration of War.  This is really Louis Carroll or Franz Kafka talking.  Therefore, this authorization for the use of military force is not subject to the fifteen day limit.  In fact, it is a limitless authority to go around and make links, listen to people, and we wont tell you who.  Nothing in existing law says that because no war was formally declared, there are any particular steps that are automatically out of the question.
As much passion as there is on the side thats being represented in the discussion weve had today, theres passion on the other side.  There are people who believe as strongly as we do that our country faces mortal peril in the form of terrorism.  This discussion has to continue.  Id offer the idea that we talk more carefully about the nature of the terrorism risk.  We need to hear more from our government about the nature of the risk so that we can digest it and assess it for ourselves.  All of us need to be very serious about it.  I disagree with the idea that bad faith in the White House is at the root of this.  Serious people feel strongly against how we feel, and we need to take their arguments seriously and address them seriously, if we are to come to the place we all want to be  which is respect for the separation of powers and the rule of law in the United States.
