Thank you.  Good morning, ladies, and gentleman.  Its Washington and Lincolns birthday, and its Presidents Day.  We have to think back when we discuss this subject, and ask ourselves the opening question:  Did other Presidents do what President Bush is now doing in the midst of a war?  Is it a totally unprecedented action on the part of President Bush to institute a program of warrantless surveillance?  I understand that Abraham Lincoln did something like suspend the writ of habeas corpus, which people could argue was even more momentous in its day and since.  Franklin Roosevelt, of course, sent Japanese-Americans into internment camps at the beginning of World War II, and later apologized for it  not he, but people apologized on his behalf.  Presidents under certain war-time conditions and feeling certain extreme pressures may very well believe that what they are doing, though highly controversial, are very much within the national interest of the country, even if it tends to bend the law, ignore the law, or sidestep the law.  In their minds, what is happening is an action that is in the best interest of this country, and they were elected to make decisions of that sort.  As we have our discussion today, I just wanted to say that.
If a member of al Qaeda, or something affiliated with them, is having a telephone conversation with someone in the United States, an American citizen, why would you not want to listen in on that conversation and find out what your enemy was doing?
Its not an argument about whether...
And yet there is only one person in one branch of the government that is the Commander in Chief in a war, so that almost by definition, you can follow on your own, efforts of the definition suggest that the President in war is somebody special.
Okay.  John Dean, I remember as a reporter covering Watergate that there was that phrase that you used one day  was it at the Senate Judiciary Committee  where you said that a cancer is growing on this presidency, and you were referring to the Nixon presidency, so the obvious question to you, Mr. Dean, is a cancer growing on this presidency?
End up meaning that you imagine it could possibly end at impeachment?
But he just ducked it.
Like what?
But there is some stirring up on Capitol Hill now, so we may get to that point, and we will later in our discussion.
quite often we hear that the President has inherent powers, kind of one of those mystical phrases, which you can translate for us.  In those inherent powers, can it not been said that he has the power to do what hes doing right now with this surveillance program?
Not loudly.
Okay.  Hang on a second.  Jim Harper, here in Washington, when one mentions Cato Institute, one imagines a very conservative institution.  Correct me if Im wrong, but youre concerned about civil liberties because the new high technology mining of electronic correspondence by the President may be dipping into our civil liberties in a way that is unacceptable.  Am I phrasing that right?
But lets face it.  I would love to give you more information.  But if I give you more information, Osama bin Laden is going to be listening in.  As much as I love you, Jim, I cant run that risk.
Mary DeRosa, you have spent much of your life looking into national security issues, and international relations.  I would imagine that the Presidents argument would be persuasive in almost every way.  The War on Terror introduces a new kind of war.  It introduces a new and heavier set of responsibilities for the government, and perhaps the citizens as well.  We simply have to take certain steps because we are fighting against a ruthless enemy.
Cant transparency itself in the war on terrorism be regarded as an enemy?
You have spoken about a new model to protect individual privacy.  What would be the ingredients in this new model?
I would like to address a question to all of you, which comes right out of what Jim Harper particularly referred to.  Were in a war.  Im old enough to remember something called the Declaration of War, which I believe is in the U.S. Constitution.  Since World War II, we havent had one of those, though weve been involved in a nonstop series of wars.  What has happened?  Where is this declaration?  Why arent we getting it any longer?
We dont know that was the Vice President, only by the phraseology that it was his superior.
But so much of what is happening today seems to rotate around either we are at war and that connotes many important things to a lot of us, or were not.  Or are we in something in between, John Dean?
Let me just ask Mary something.  Suppose that everything that Tony has now said is absolutely accurate.  I cant argue with it all.  Suppose that after going through all 5,000 of those you come up empty-handed, but on the 5001st you come upon the individual who is planning to put a bomb underneath George Washington University, where we are now.  It would stifle higher education in this country.  Isnt it worth it?
Jim, my sister is a very practical woman.  If she was listening to this discussion, she might ask, Look, if youve got nothing to hide, what are you so worried about?  Let them listen in.  Who cares?
Tell us what data mining is.
Larry Tribe, you have argued cases before the Supreme Court.  You are a student of the Supreme Court, and a lot of people have said that you want to be on the Supreme Court.  Let us say the cases that are now being filed in one court after another  one case submitted by the ACLU.  Supposing they go up the chain and get to the Supreme Court, what would happen?
I feel as if Im back in a classroom listening to you and surrounded by such noble and erudite people.  If all of that were said on September 10, 2001, and we had that sense that this was all a good theoretical exercise, its a nice thing to discuss  and you are absolutely right, sir, youre absolutely right  but then, September 11 did happen, and I think what I am hearing is that in spite of September 11, we have to go on as if it did not happen, as if we havent learned anything from that.
If you asked Lyndon Johnson, he would agree with you completely.
I wonder if they crossed.
And that means what?
Mary DeRosa?
Mary?
Would you look at it from the inside of the government for a second, Tony?  When they look out at America, at the institutions of America, what are the institutions that they are most concerned about?  I speak as a former active journalist, and I have the impression quite often that American governments seem to be most frightened by the media.  In this particular case, the whole issue arose because the New York Times did a story of December of last year revealing the existence of this program.  You wouldnt have a lawsuit if thats not the case.
And the New York Times waited one year, one whole year before they put in on the front page of the newspaper, so it was not done cavalierly.  This was a very responsible decision-making process on their part.
But youve never been a journalist.
Youve never been in the newsroom when there is a major decision like that.
Id like to have an argument with you about that.
Tony, thank you very much.  Jim?  And then were going to go to questions.
I think in fairness it has to be pointed out, too, Jim, and this is directly to you and partially to Tony, that at the beginning of 2002, Karl Rove, who is the political advisor to the President, said in instructions sent out to Republicans preparing for the off-year election, that the war on terrorism and the way in which that would be used, was very much going to be the heart of the political effort to elect Republicans.  And that was done in the 2004 election as well.
No, no, Im not saying that they didnt believe the other.  I think they believed both.
Okay, we have questions here, lots of questions.  And to the degree that I can read your handwriting  if I had written them, I couldnt  but Ill do the best I can here.
Okay, thank you, Larry.  The question here is for any panelist, although Im going to turn to Tony and ask him to respond to this.  Weve read reports of the administration infiltrating religious groups participating in peaceful anti-war activities.  Give us your general thoughts and where will these activities go in the future?
You know that the...
Mary?
Jim?
This program, in addition to being carried by C-SPAN, is of course being sent off on the internet in a thousand different mysterious ways, and we have received a number of questions through the internet.  This one from Gary is Des Moines, Iowa:  if it is illegal to authorize these wiretaps, why arent changes being made?  John, why arent changes being made?
It wasnt presidential, though.
I have a question for Jim Harper.  Jim, in 2002, the question of rights, the American public was made aware of the CIA Total Information Awareness program.  The public was outraged.  In 2003, it was deep-funded.  Does the current NSA program, I guess the point is:  is the NSA program today that were talking about this actual Total Information Awareness program, but in another wrapping?
The black budget is the budget that is not made public.
This is a couple of interesting questions here.  Vice President Cheney, in his interview with Brit Hume, this was on Fox last week concerning the shooting incident, stated that an executive order gave him the power to declassify information.  Please discuss the constitutionality of such an order.  Larry?
What are you saying?
John, why is it important whether the Vice President, who is described as a heartbeat away from the presidency and all that, why is it important whether he has the right or doesnt have the right to declassify?
So does he have that power or not?
Thank you very much.  What recourse do we have if Congress and the Judiciary refuse to check the excesses of executive power?
Okay.  As terrorism is merely a tactic, not an ideology, isnt the acceptance of the phraseology war on terrorism in and of itself conceding half of the argument?
Explain that.
Thank you, Jim.  Larry, you wanted to add something?
Kathy from Bloomberg, Pennsylvania on the internet has this question:  How does the NSA determine who al Qaeda is without listening to all communications?  Mary?
Weve only got about five minutes to go and I want to get a few more questions in.  One is from De Harris, New Mexico from Caroline Parks:  I would appreciate an explanation of the difference between a Declaration of War and the authorization to use military force when passed by Congress.  That was in the fall of 2001.  How does that difference impact the power that the executive branch actually has?  When I hear people say were at war, I wonder if its technically true.
What is extremely interesting is that in a lot of the questions Ive tried to read through, there is something that runs through all of them.  There is a suspicion that the administration is using this warrantless surveillance program for purposes broader than the war against terrorism.  Theres a suspicion that something else is going on; that theyre going after political opponents.
The assumption underlying all of the administration policies and actions is that we are really at war.  In my opinion, we are not at war, but have occupied a country.  Even the idea of war against terror is totally questionable, as wars are carried out against nations.  The idea here is that, what kind of enemy are we fighting?
Thank you very much.  John Dean?
Thank you, John.  Larry Tribe?
Thank you, Larry.  Jim Harper?
Thank you, Jim.  Mary DeRosa?
I must say that on 9/11, an editor called me and asked me to do a piece on how 9/11 has changed journalism.  I said that I couldnt do that piece because journalism hasnt changed; the principles are essentially the same.  The story has changed; what we are writing about has changed.  The broadcast of that has changed, but not the fundamentals of journalism.  I end up sharing those views as expressed by the panel here, investing as well in those who do not agree with us, a good faith effort to see that this country is protected in this new post-9/11 world in the best way we can figure out.  Clearly, we are troubled land at the moment.  We are a sharply polarized country.  People on the Republican side dont tend to accept the views or even believe there is even good trust in faith on the Democratic side, and vise versa.  Somehow its going to end up with the people of this country, and we will find in the people  if we are lucky - the good sense to come to the right conclusion.
