Lets go ahead and get started.  Carol and Grinn, you and I are the only current outside board members.  So we comprise an Executive Session of the Board and our agenda calls for us to do the work of an ad hoc nominating and governance committee.  [1] Generally, we have not recorded minutes for these sessions and I just report into the full meeting minutes, any items we consider in executive session.  Lets do that today, too.  We will be joined in our full session by our officers; meanwhile, Carol, you suggested inclusion of the topic of Director Recruiting on our agenda for this executive session.  I note that Grinn has past familiarity with Deep Pockets VC Fund and its Board Nominee, Dag.  And I think all three of us have experience with other boards.  Carol, you have the floor.
Well, I checked with Esher, our General Counsel, on this issue, and the Agreement gives Deep Pockets the sole right to appoint.  So, asking for a change might be a fools errand.  Grinn, will you share your insights with us.
These are good points, Grinn.  I think that we can harmonize these points by moving at a deliberate speed in this area.  While we are required to add one director now, and that will likely be Dag, if we add a second director at the same time that beings other complications.  I see no compelling need to act now.  I also want us to do a self-assessment [8] to identify the talents and skills that we want to add to our Board.  And we need to be sure that Betcher and the other Officers support this approach.  And of course, we should consider the views of other shareholders.  When we started the Company, I discussed governance with several of the early individual investors (remember the seed money for our Series A shares?).   Those other Angel Investors accepted the fact that none of them would be on our board and that we would add people as the need arose.  [9] Their only concern was that we avoid a situation where any one faction, Management or Investors would have a commanding control of the Board.  They wanted us to have a culture where all factions were heard and yet the Company could move decisively when needed.  Thats a tough standard, but we are all trying to keep that in the front of our thinking.
Great.  Carol, I see you moving toward the door to invite the others to join us, but we have one other issue on the agenda.  And that is the issue of whether Dag will receive outside director compensation under our Directors compensation plan. [11] I think it is fairly common, that one who joins a board under contractual rights is performing under a contract of appointment and thus is not compensated.
If you will permit me, I will discuss it off line with Betcher.  Perhaps he or one of our people raised it with Deep Pockets in the negotiations.  There may even be a statement about it on their web page.  So we can keep moving, I will bring it back to a further Executive Session meeting if [12] it appears that compensation is expected.  Will that be acceptable?
