So, Gustavo, have a seat! It's nice to meet you.
Thank you! I look out the window when my brain is too full and it calms me down.
We moved into this building in 2012 when our old building downtown got too crowded.
It's a great story and we're having a lot of fun. Of course, every organization has its challenges! Let's get into your questions for me. I'm eager to hear them!
No, we use ADP for our payroll, but because we have people all over the country and we also employ people seasonally, we end up having more payroll issues and projects than perhaps other companies our size do. The title is Supervisor, and there is one employee in the Payroll department, who is a mix of clerical and IT-focused if that makes sense. You'd be responsible for making sure the payroll is processed correctly including withholding, commissions, W-2s at the end of the year -- the whole enchilada.
That is Monica, and later in this interviewing process you will meet her if it makes sense and we are all moving along together. Monica is an ace but she is not interested in running our payroll process. She is a wizard at creating reports, using our HRIS and analyzing payroll data. This role is a lot more involved with our relationship with ADP and our department managers as well as our employees and of course, the HR staff.
Definitely! I'm the Director of HR. I report to our CEO, Mike Chambers, and I'm responsible for HR, Payroll, Training and Administration. There are seven of us in the department all together -- this new Payroll Supervisor, Monica, me, two HR Generalists, one Training person and one Administration person who works with our department admins and receptionists.
That's exactly right. Geeta and I agreed that we wanted Payroll in HR because it's an employee service function to us. The point of running the payroll as far as we're concerned is to make sure that people get paid correctly and on time and that their questions get answered. Of course we work hand-in-hand with Finance but apart from expense reimbursements, our Finance folks don't work as closely with our team as we do in HR.
Well, we're doing great with ADP who also handles our HRIS, but like I said we have employees coming and going quite often, because we hire for seasonal roles in our centers around the country and here in our office, we process the payroll for all of them. We have people working in fourteen states so there are all kinds of state requirements to deal with.
That is true. I like the idea of being available to employees. When I was at Acme Explosives, I held monthly lunchtime meetings where people could come and ask questions about payroll. You wouldn't think anyone would come but they did, because they wanted to understand their deductions and 401(k) matching and so on -- all kinds of things. I brought up topics and explained them, things like garnishing payroll and other sometimes-sticky topics so that no one should be embarrassed to have to ask.
There is a person in Finance named Nancy who works with our benefits providers. I'm glad you mentioned that because she  would be an important person to you and vice versa if you come to work here. Our two HR Generalists work with the employees on their benefits issues but everything is administered outside, by our benefits partners.
Definitely. One fun thing we do is that our two Generalists and our Administrative person, Gretchen, come up with lots of ideas for new 'soft' benefits for our employees all the time -- like discounts at local restaurants, free tickets to local performances and so on. We have a very wide-reaching definition for "benefits," way beyond health and 401(k) and so on. We figure that  having 350 employees in one building has got to give us some clout that we can use for our employees' benefit!
Yes, and luckily a lot of that is automated. Tell me about your plans -- why this is a good next opportunity for you?
That's great to hear and I will also "Back atcha" because several HR people I know have recommended you to me.
Yes, we have 350 people here now and another 400 spread out across the country. We have a Regional Operations Manager named Bruno who reports to our Director of Regional Operations but wears an HR hat, too. He is the de facto HR generalist chief for our folks in the regions and there are Operations people in each of our 15 offices who sit in on our HR meetings and function as generalists, part-time. You'd be working closely with those folks, too.
That's a brilliant question and a topic we talk about all the time. It's a double-edged sword. We want to make the commitment to people that they are fully part of the team and entitled to employee benefits and everything that comes with full-time employment, but as you say, nothing is certain and we don't want to be in a headcount reduction situation if we can possibly avoid it. We hire very conservatively here. Everybody is stretched thin and we also hire temps and interns, much more freely than we do full-time employees, to cover the gaps.
Yes, but they still participate in some of the things we do for fun here while they're on the team on a temporary basis. They are our principal source for new hires, also.
We don't have formal pay ranges. They are too many variables even between two people who perform the same roles. Our Administrative person Gretchen does our EEO reporting and she makes sure that people are not unfairly paid based on their EEO status but we pay people based on their role, its impact, their experience, and what the market dictates for their qualifications. Over time we reward people who do an outstanding job. We don't have a pre-set annual increase schedule. Our managers budget for salary increases and when their budgets are approved, they negotiate salary increases with each person.
It's a negotiation. We collaborate with our teammates on everything, so a manager is not going to say "Here's your raise -- end of conversation!" They have already started to talk about the next year's compensation before the new year arrives. Sometimes people don't get a pay raise and they understand why. It's not that we don't value them but the role may not warrant a pay raise and in that case, if there is a step-up role available we try to give them a crack at it.
Temp firms and employee referrals are our two biggest sources. We pay bonuses between $100 and $500 for new hires that our employees bring us, once they stay three months. After that it's job ads and word of mouth.
I'd like to know more about how you would interface with our regions, for starters. You talked about those  lunchtime meetings and that sounds great. Our two HR Generalists and our regional Operations folks who double as HR people would be interested in anything educational that will give our employees more of the information they want. Can you suggest some ways that you'd build a bridge between our headquarters office and our regions, where people are often on a bonus plan and a commission plan on top of their salary?
