When you suggest as much to address this question [sounds like], I immediately flash back on the morning when I went into the Presidents office to tell him there was a cancer growing on his presidency.  The reason I did so was he had both feet up on the desk.  I wasnt sure he was paying attention.  I wanted to make sure he heard what I had to say that morning, so I started by telling him there was a cancer on this presidency.  That brought his feet to the floor.
Well, Nixon, of course, was not impeached.
He just ducked it.  Theres no question in my mind that this President has already committed one or more technically impeachable offenses.
Well, for example, going to war in Iraq by misrepresenting to Congress what he was doing and why he was doing it.  Thats, first of all, a crime, to go to Congress and to make material misrepresentations.
I was delighted to hear Jim put one of these things in perspective.  If you look at the raw numbers of people who die more from other things than the total from terrorism...more people die annually from drowning.  Industrial accidents are twice the number.  Deaths from heart attacks run several hundred thousand a year.  Deaths from cancer run half a million a year.  There are so many things threatening American lives, to focus on this one issue alone  to go to war on it - seems to be a little in disproportion.  I grew up in the Cold War.  I grew up in the duck-and-cover era, where indeed we thought that we might be mutually destroyed.  That is to me a much greater threat than what we are dealing with today.  When we become frightened by the terrorists, the terrorists are winning.
Let me say first that the difference between national security and internal security is a very thin line.  The difference between foreign policy and domestic policy is a very thing line.
Well, as somebody youre talking as an insider, but I could never find that clear line.  It just doesnt exist.
When you take all those factors, and what Bush is doing now, what Nixon did during Vietnam, they indeed felt their policies were inseparable from both their political, national security, foreign policy advantages, and therefore their policy was premised on that sort of mentality, where you dont really have a line.
That means that in his pursuit of his policies, he has figured he has a constituency that believes in what hes doing.  The rest of us - to hell with us.  And thats pretty much the way it is.
Id say the primary reason is that the Bush administration has found that the ability to impose great threats on this Congress, which they control.  The Congress to me, somebody who started his career in government working on Capitol Hill as the minority counsel to the House Judiciary Committee at a time when Lyndon Johnson was in the White House, I actually experienced something called oversight.
It was presidential oversight, and its something that it seems in this Congress with this President there is zero oversight.  It is striking how much institutional pride has been lost by this Congress, and until we have that, this White House is going to be able to be pretty much what it wants.
Well, you try to limit.  In fact, during the Nixon administration, believe it or not, Richard Nixon wanted to declassify an awful lot of papers.  His motive might have been very well suited; he wanted to do it because it embarrassed a lot of Democrats to do so, but he had Bill Rehnquist, who was then the head of OLC run an interdepartmental chair where we had a program to declassify a lot of material.  Still using mules in the military was classified and things of that nature, but Presidents wanted limit in it if you will.
He has that power to classify but not declassify.  Theres a difference.
I flew back from California for this brief visit for one reason.  I cant think of a more important issue than what were seeing with this administration.  Theyve really lost respect for the rule.  It runs across the board from electronic surveillance to the abuse of torture, and I cant believe that in my lifetime I would hear somebody in the White House put out a memo authorizing the use of torture.  This is pretty serious stuff.  This is worse than Watergate, to borrow a term.  I would sum it up as we can only hope that in 2006, the light bulb goes off for the American people and they say, this isnt the way the country is supposed to be run.  They go to the polls and make a decision.  Thats my wish.
