It can be said, but not loudly.
People have, I think, inherent rights, although the President and those he favors tend not to believe that; they tend to believe that the rights of people are limited to those that are spelled out in the Constitution.
The likeliest thing is that Court would say the groups who are challenging these programs dont have standing to bring the challenge.  They may suspect that they are being overheard and they may feel chilled, but that isnt enough under the Courts doctrine.  The likelihood is that the Court would duck the issue, and wed get no more accountability than you have now.
The President is saying, look, you guys blame me for not connecting the dots before, and now that Im connecting the dots you blame me.  What do you want me to do?  Of course, hes not connecting the dots; hes collecting more dots and its important to remember that.
A number of leading Republicans have gravitated toward that idea, bless the Presidents program by statute, line up behind the President, and retroactively validate it.  After all, in a sense, thats what Congress did with Abraham Lincolns suspension of habeas corpus.
Yes.  The Presidents power to open the window of sunlight on the material that the President had originally cast into the dark knows no constitutional limits, unless you could prove  this is extremely implausible  that it is being used solely and exclusively for improper political purposes, but thats just one of these theoretical professor points.  You cant ever prove that.
I was going to say that I agree with what Jim is saying, but I do have this worry:  If those of us who are concerned with the rule of law and preserving important Constitutional principles in war time, are understood to be somehow suggesting theres no difference between dying in the World Trade Center and dying in a highway accident, we will be dismissed as irrelevant because most of feel there is a difference.
Its very hard to add anything to those two statements.  I deeply believe in the principles this country is founded on, but I deeply fear that people can be bought off and persuaded that some marginal benefit of security is worth giving up those principles.  I profoundly share the hope that people will wake up and vote in terms of restoring a system of government that doesnt use fear mongering and sloganeering; one that doesnt take the American people for granted and pays some attention to the important value of actual truth, as opposed to marketing.  That means for me that we desperately need to elect a legislative branch that will check an executive who is profoundly and totally out of control.
