I actually agree with those points, and I agree with many of the arguments that the Administration make to support the program.  I think terrorism is a grave threat; it is a different kind of intelligence challenge than what weve faced in the past.  It requires some types of new technology and information, and more domestic intelligence than previously.  I agree with all of those things.  It simply doesnt get me to the message theyve used.  I might be okay the type of surveillance theyre conducting, but it needs to have oversight, particularly with the new kinds of intelligence challenges.  It needs checks, oversight, and transparency to the degree possible by Congress and the public.
I dont think so.  There are some things that I think need to remain classified under some circumstances.  There are certainly things we cant have out there, but there are many things you can do.  What you have to do when you talk about using and sharing private information, is be able to build up.  Youre not going to succeed in these programs.  There are national security issues here in the way they are carrying it out, because youre not going to ultimately succeed if you cant build up some kind of accountability.  Theres not an understanding that there will be real oversight and protection against abuses.  I think we actually need more of that than weve had in the past.
I think with the greater use of private information and technology, you need to have more than just occasional Congressional oversight.  Its important; its critical.  But more than an Inspector General investigation after the fact, we need to have ongoing monitoring, auditing, and a much more rigorous check.  If you dont have that, you will never get the trust and youll just be in this cycle of secrecy, leaks, outrage, prohibition, and new programs.
Well, I think there are ways that you can conduct some of the things youre talking about the right way, and there are ways that you can conduct it in a way that is not worth it.  I dont know what exactly theyre doing in this program, so theres a certain degree of hypothetical.  For example, if you were doing those kinds of searches but it was all automated and no human beings saw them  if no intrusive action could be taken on the 5,000 people based on some automated link, sure.  More importantly, if there is a reliable oversight to avoid abuse or misuse, it can be effective.  Before you ever start one of these programs, you need to be absolutely rigorous about finding out whether its going to do you any good.  I think thats got to be the first question, but it isnt often.  One of the problems that you have with an executive branch that does everything on its own, is they are going to take the easier way.  They are going to take the way where maybe they dont have to test everything, because nobody is going to stop them.
I just have a brief corollary to what would life be like after 9/11 as a president, and I think having worked at the NFC, and with national security professionals, I think another thing that you cant ignore is that after 9/11, I wasnt at the NFC, and I was thinking oh my God, what must it be like there, what must it be like for all the peoples whose job it is to protect national security.  And I think because they want to do their jobs really well, because they want to not be the person whos responsible for another attack, they are going to, with the best of intentions, air on the side of doing more.  They cannot be expected to balance; they cannot be expected to check themselves.  Theyre going to go farther on the side of if the first 5000 didnt work; Im going to just try 5001.  Thats what their viewpoint is.
I think that it could just as easily and might be more likely be overzealous thus leading to incompetence and overzealousness combined, not really that, as I said before, people who are trying to do their job just sort of go too far and not check.
I think we dont know exactly what theyre doing, but the best Ive been able to determine is that they are probably using some type of link-analysis.  Theyve got numbers that Ive gotten from a variety of ways, and theyre doing some sort of linking.  Whether theyre doing analysis of content or who is calling who, I dont know.  Obviously somebody knows, but I dont know if anybody here has a better view.  It is probably links that are mostly automated.  When they get to a level of a gut feeling that this is something we need to look at, then they will listen in.  Thats the best I can put together.
I believe that terrorists pose a very grave threat and I think that fighting terrorism is an incredible challenge.  Its an intelligence challenge.  I start from that, but the way to address it is not to just push executive authority to its limit at all times.  Thats counterproductive.  The way to address is to work with our entire system, trust the constitution, trust the checks and balances, and work to build trust.  By pushing executive authority to its limit, which they justify with reasons of national security, it doesnt work.  As weve seen, both in the case of torture and the NSA program, it takes bites that are unnecessary.  It breeds confusion and it is unnecessary.
