And you're going to talk about entrepreneurship at this summit in Nairobi.
Is there any link between security and entrepreneurship?
And I suppose the - you know, you famously said when you went to Africa, I think when you first became president, you know, "What we need is strong institutions and-
" - not strong men". You're going to Ethiopia, where there is effectively no opposition in Parliament.
You're going to Kenya, where the International Criminal Court is still investigating certain members of the government, which seems kind of hardly ideal institutions.
Well, haven't the Chinese got there first in Africa? You're going to go to the African Union Building, which was built with Chinese money, you're going to travel along Chinese-built roads, you're going to go past endless Chinese traders on those roads.
I'm going to suggest there may be one other difficult issue when you're there. And that's the issue of homosexuality, gay marriage, after the Supreme Court ruling. I mean, the deputy president in Kenya, who you're going to meet, Mr Ruto, he said - "We have heard that in the US they have allowed gay relations and other dirty things.
Can we just move from difficult conversations that you're about to have in Kenya and the excruciatingly difficult conversations that you had in getting the Iran nuclear deal? I'm sure some people would say that yes, you've set out the case where there is no pathway to a nuclear bomb now for Iran -
But, the net effect of lifting sanctions is that billions more will go to groups like Hezbollah, the Assad regime, and that is going to destabilise the region even more.
And you've had an intense campaign to settle the argument, which you've set out with great confidence.
Have you managed to change anyone's mind yet of the Gulf states or in Congress?
But have they got the willingness to fight in the -
Nowhere is facing greater instability, and you mention ISIL, than in Syria. It looks like the British may be about to start flying alongside America and launching airstrikes. Would you welcome that?
You talk about the 2% defence spending in Britain. I'm right in thinking that there was quite a bit of pressure put on from here, saying it would be very bad if you didn't.
When we tried to burn this place down?
History.
And pe--
And people have talked about strategic shrinkage. That Britain is no longer playing its place on the world stage in the way that it used to. There's going to be a referendum on whether we stay in the European Union or not. And David Miliband, the former foreign secretary, he said, "It's almost like Britain would be resigning from the world and no US government would be impressed by that.
Can we just talk about, because you mentioned a moment ago about that you're in the tail end of your presidency. After the midterm elections, I read every commentator say, "Well, this administration is effectively over now. The president is a dead man walking. And nothing is going to happen until 2016.
Except that you've kind of got this deal, you've got Cuba, diplomatic relations, healthcare reform embedded, major trade deal with Asia. It's not a question of journalist--
Okay, so it's not -
Okay, so it's not a question that a journalist often asks, what's gone right?
Let me just ask you this - finally, because- I'm sure you would like it to be written that President Obama turned "Yes we can" into -
"Yes we did.
But is there an issue that there are be going to be unfinished business? Perhaps most notably on race and on guns by the time you leave the White House?
Mr President, thank you very much.
