Im good. If its all the same to you, Im going to be speaking as Winston Churchill for the rest of the interview.
[As Churchill] This is not the beginning of the interview, but it may be the end of the beginning.
How are you, sir? I havent talked to you in a minute.
Ive been recording in New York, Los Angeles, and Nashville. Ive never recorded in New York or L.A. before. I tried to go to some new places and meet musicians Ive never met before, and see if I could get to a new place. Im getting somewhere. Ill send you something. Its good gardening music or roofing music or, you know, back-alley stabbing music. [Oldman laughs] Im trying to think of some good activities that people havent written songs for yet. What is good is this Winston Churchill performance. I had to keep staring at your eyes to see if it was really you. Youve always been my favorite actor, and Im not just saying that. The only date I went on in high school was to see Dracula. I used to get in big coffeehouse debates about your acting. I would say, Every single time you see Gary Oldman, he is completely transformed into someone you cant even recognize.
Im going to write that down. Im going to start acting some more now.
Churchill wrote 50 books?
This is Donald Trump youre talking about? [Oldman laughs] No, its safe to say we dont have leaders like that anymore.
What is the general feeling about Churchill in Britain nowadays? Is he a controversial figure? Is he highly revered?
Its also people not following history?if you horribly shame the loser of a war, you will fight them again.
Churchill was the perfect person at the perfect time. What do you think of impressionists? When I see a comedian or an actor trying to do impressions of people, I sometimes wonder where the line is between someone who can do a very good impression and someone who is doing a very good job at acting and immersing themselves in a role. There must be some line when you were acting as Churchill. How do you know if youre crossing the line into impression?
Like, if they were to do the president, they would take one little thing he said and exaggerate it and make into a catch phrase.
You worked with Dennis Hopper in Chattahoochee [1990]?I watched him recently in Cool Hand Luke [1967]. He has a small part where he acts like hes crazy. I didnt meet him so maybe you can school me on this, but it seems to me that his real-life persona was like the characters he played. Like, if you met him at a bar, youd say, Wow, that guy is a character. But an actor like you has to become the character. So what is it like working with someone like Dennis Hopper, actors who dont really have to push themselves into some other world; they can just kind of be who they are?
Tell me why.
What is that?
I know the scene youre talking about. Hes switching back and forth between two people who are trying to stonewall him. That is a long scene.
I have a fun thing for you to try next time youre at a coffee shop or in an airport. People have these Bluetooth headsets where it looks like theyre talking to themselves, but theyre really talking on the phone. I think you should say as loud as possible, Hold on one second, Ive got another call. And then switch into a Russian accent and say, Hold on, Ive another call. And then switch into Winston Churchill, and see if anyone catches on.
I think Bob Dylan said that you can look into the window of a restaurant and everyone is being normal, and then you walk into the restaurant and everything changes, and you dont get to see people being normal anymore. You might as well just leave. [laughs]
I bet. But you do a great job of disguising yourself in everyday life.
Right. Why is he buying rat poison at the hardware store right now? I mean, theres no way he could be committing a murder.
I wanted to ask about whether you think were at a pinnacle of how far you can really go in the art of acting before the next generation, the future of acting. It seems like were going to see more of what was done with Jeff Bridges in Tron: Legacy [2010], where a younger version of his face was CGId onto another persons body. Where do you see that going? Could you see yourself working 15 years from now in a world where everything is digital?
I hope not.
Real film.
Well, sometimes I had to use my other hand, too. [Oldman laughs] I dont even know what that joke means.
And thats what it should be used for. Whats also interesting about Dunkirk is that the movie came out shortly before Darkest Hour, which is an amazing exploration of just a few weeks of Churchills life, and historically, both stories were happening at that same time. How cool is that? What an incredible one-two punch of historical, World War II?based films.
I love that the film just focuses on this one period in Churchills life. You learn a lot by analyzing a brief moment in time. You see how important Dunkirk was and how quickly and easily Britain could have been invaded. If England had been invaded and America wasnt then able to come over and land planes, who knows what would have happened? It could have been horrendous.
Isnt that wild? If you really look at it, moments like Dunkirk or the Cuban Missile Crisis are so pivotal and close to the end of humanity as we know it. And now we have North Korea and Trump  Carl Sagan would often say, The sky calls to us. If we do not destroy ourselves, we will one day venture to the stars. People are enamored by the idea of, Oh, were going to travel to other worlds. But the first part is the most important. If we dont destroy ourselves.
I love how the movie explores all of that and shows people what could have been. You learn a lot about who Churchill was through your brilliant performance of him. What a bizarre character he was. At times, he was an incredible speaker, and other times he was almost like a grumpy old man in the corner of a pub.
And passion. When you have passion, theres all the time in the world. You make the time.
My speechwriter wrote it for me.
