Mr. President, welcome to Davos.
Thank you for agreeing to come on CNBC and Squawk Box. I appreciate it.
You have known me a long time.
Little bit different position  few more people around, too.
So, the America First president comes to Davos. And you know, when you say "Davos" you know what a lot of people think: globalists, elitists. What will you say when you address not just the globalists and the elitists, but everyone? When you address them, what will be your message?
You've moved a little ...
Yes. You've moved a little towards the center. But so Macron's saying that globalism doesn't solve problems. Suddenly other countries are saying, you know, "We need to take care of, you know, our own country to some extent." So it's almost like the differences between America First and Davos. I think there's plenty of room for you ...
Right. It's not usually exclusive.
Let me tell you about the difference of Davos this year.
We've done three three-hour shows, we have about eight guests per hour, so that's, like, 50 or 60 guests.
They are more optimistic this year  and there's global growth.
But the one thing most are bringing up  and then I want to tell you about  if you didn't see the Jamie Dimon and the Lloyd Blankfein interview, I want to just tell you what they said about the potential for GDP growth ...
Because those guys might know what they're talking about. But the tax plan has been brought up almost without exception in a positive way by not just the CEOs, but by leaders from other countries even. They maybe they need to look at  maybe they need to invest in the United States now because it's a better environment for business.
Same day almost.
Even Starbucks. Even Starbucks ...
So Dimon said ...
JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon, I know you know him. Not only did he say he thought 3 percent was possible, he said we could get to 4 percent in 2018. Lloyd Blankfein, and I pressed him a little because I said, "That was not the outcome  the election that you were, I think, hoping for. Now that you've seen what's happened to the stock market, up 40 percent since Election Day, how businesses are growing confidence, are you happy with the outcome?" And he said  he couldn't really say, "I'm happy with the outcome," but he did say ...
... but no, but he did.
But he said ...
But  no, but he said, "I don't think the stock market would be where it is, I don't think GDP would be where it is. Maybe the polarization would be less," but he had to concede that the benefits probably outweighed any of the downside of ...
That was Lloyd.
Jamie and Lloyd also said 3 percent is possible long term, which we haven't heard from all the economists that supposedly ...
Right. There was the hurricane.
Right. Can we talk about the year?
So the year, all these things that you have pointed out. But you've been dealing, negotiating now in government instead of in the private sector. And it's been I think lovingly referred to as the swamp by certain ...
Is it difficult? And have you learned  are you approaching it differently now? Would you give your  what would you give yourself in terms of dealing, negotiating with the government versus business? What grade for the first year?
Have you learned anything?
Would you do anything different now?
Well, can we talk trade real quickly while we're doing it.
So we had solar panels, washing machines. I'm not sure where it goes from here.
I'm not sure how China reacts, whether steel's next ...
You'll  they're grown-ups and I think they understand that maybe we had some ...
We have some legitimate  right. Would you  you going to stick with bilateral or would you ever go back in the multi  would TPP, would that ever be possible to look at that again?
So you might re-enter  are you opening up the door to reopening TPP? Or ...
That's interesting. Would you handicap ...
I'm a little bit, yeah. I'm a little taken aback ...
I want to know ...
You said  but NAFTA, maybe not NAFTA ...
Can you give me any indication which way you're leaning? Because there's a lot of people, lot of the CEOs that have been on here, they all seem to acknowledge that it's 30 years later and there's a lot of changes that make a lot of sense, but to not abandon the deal. We ...
Are you leaning towards staying in or would you really go out of the ...
So what we'll see ...
The way that the shutdown finally was, you know, was ended.
I get the feeling that Senator Schumer is taking a lot of flak from his flank, from the far-left flank. So I feel like he's been burnt, which makes me worry about when we go back. In two weeks ...
What's going to happen on Monday with DACA? What are you willing to go further to the ...
Will you stay with Cotton or will you move further to what ...
You said 10n to 12 years for citizenship, right, for the Dreamers. Will Cotton go along with that?
You want ...
Will you ask for $25 billion, Mr. President? Is that ...
... and did Chuck Schumer offer $1.6 billion?
Did he take it back? Did he ...
Did he  how much did he agree to?
I want to ask you a Davos question, just because we're here and I don't know, I even get taken over by this. But whenever we're here, we talk about wealth disparity and income inequality, not just globally but everywhere.
Big problem. A resurgent United States, a strongly growing United States makes a world of difference  not just for the United States but for the world in general. But I'm just wondering if you did  if you were able to keep GDP or if the United States grows at 3 percent or 4 percent and we have the coffers, that we can do a lot with 3 percent or 4 percent. It's totally different than when we don't have money.
Do you have a way of addressing the skills gap and education? As a businessperson, you solve problems. Now you're in government ...
Will that be something that will ...
The Journal this morning, lead editorial was that  and they gave a lot of credit to the Trump administration for where economic growth is right now. But then they said, "Why would a Cabinet member bring up the idea of a weaker dollar when things are going so well?" And I'm wondering whether  you saw Secretary Mnuchin's comments yesterday. Do you agree with those? Were they taken out of context? Where are you ...
Well, we're going to have to end it there. I'm just  last question. Will we have another shutdown? Will you move more to the center on immigration ...
You don't think they'll do it ...
Where's the movement going to come?
All right. Thank you very much.
