Jack, how are you?
[laughs] Okay.
Thats fantastic. That isnt in the film, but youve obviously done your research.
Im doing well. Im busy with things. Im being creative, which is always good. What about you?
I think what it comes down to is that acting is an antidote to self-hatred. [both laugh]
I think it was my way out, a sort of avenue of escape. The fun of it was getting away from myself and stepping into the characteristics and the behavior of someone else. It stems from that thing of not necessarily being that comfortable in your own skin. But the challenge of playing someone like Winston Churchill is that theres more footage of him than you might believe, and theres certainly enough to read about. Next to Washington, I think he has the most biographies about him. And then theres his own writing, which is something like 50 books.
I havent read all of them, but Im told every one of them is worth reading. He changed political parties twice. He fought with distinction in four wars, he served in politics, I think, for over 50 years, and he held almost every political office.
He defended the British constitution, won the Nobel Prize for Literature, painted 500 paintings, and exhibited at the Royal Academy. I mean, if you could find someone else who has done that 
I think hes both. Theres a lot of rather radical, revisionist history that goes on with Churchill. Hes often misquoted or half-quoted. So it really depends on where you get your information. Not only was the cost of the First World War enormous in terms of lives, but it was also financially crippling to Europe. And then, of course, shortly thereafter, you had the economic crash, which was just devastating. People thought that the First World War was the war to end all wars. After that, it was peace at any price. While Churchill was researching a biography of his ancestor John Churchill, who was the Duke of Marlborough and a great general, he went to Germany in 1932 and saw firsthand what was happening there. They were re-arming. He raised the alarm in Britain, and that was very out of step with the atmosphere of pacifism.
And sadly, we did. In Churchills research while writing this biography, he could see that there were certain repeating patterns. So he was coming out of years of thinking about war, studying war. He was equipped. It was like a muscle that he was exercising while Chamberlain was waving this piece of paper around, saying, Peace in our time. Churchill was considered a warmonger. I think thats why hes revered and hated.
I have a relatively good ear and can do a few impressions of people. I dont study them, but I think what happens with an impressionist is that theyre looking at one particular source.
Yes, or a particular physical mannerism or something. But theyre only focused on that one thought. Impressionists have to paint with a very broad stroke because youve got to see it within a couple of seconds. You go, Thats a really funny Robert De Niro. As an actor, though, you look at different aspects of a character. I try to completely surround myself with the assignment. Its like being in a big cloud and then some of it rains through?for instance, looking at not only Churchills way of walking and mannerisms and the way he sounds, but also looking into the psychology.
Well, I certainly look at people like that and think, Christ, I have to do all this work. [laughs] Obviously, in the same way that blues musicians have influenced your songwriting and your playing, I look at my heroes work: Alan Bates, Tom Courtenay, Albert Finney, and certainly character actors like Alec Guinness, who I admired enormously. But my taste is very wide. I love Cary Grant. I love the absolute simplicity of Gary Cooper. I also look at Newman and McQueen and even Redford. I mean, if you watch Redford in All the Presidents Men [1976], its one of the greatest screen performances.
Its in the eyes. Hes not traveling away from himself vocally or physically, or doing all the pyrotechnics. Theres something about the psychology. I will always say this to students of acting?we talk about phone acting.
Theres an example in Darkest Hour when Im on the phone with Roosevelt. Often youre not speaking to the other actor; someone is reading the lines in the room or youre not even getting any of the feed. There are people who are very good at it and people who are not good at it. In All the Presidents Men, there is one take of Redford switching phones, talking to different people; its about six or seven minutes long. Very, very slow push in on Redford. And I would say to students, You want to see phone acting? That is the Michelangelo of phone acting.
Its beautiful stuff.
[laughs] Im going to try that in Starbucks when Im in the line. Its funny you mention being out and about. As an actor, you people-watch, you observe. And the more famous you become, the sad thing is you lose the ability to do that. Instead of people-watching, you become the focus of attention.
I went to a crowded restaurant many years ago in Manhattan with David Bowie. And, oh my god, talk about atmosphere change.
Yeah. You might find this, too: if people dont expect you to be there, they dont see you. Im sure that youre recognized, but sometimes people might do a double take and then move on.
[laughs] You can always say, Im researching a role.
In 15 years time, I hope to have hung up my gloves.
Im like you in that Im an analog guy. As you know, I like wet plate photography.
Its emotional. Its got soul to it. And I know that youre a big proponent of this because I think you single-handedly made vinyl a real thing again.
Im a little scared of where its going. If you take a movie like Dunkirk?Chris Nolan likes to do a lot of in-camera stunts. I believe the boat that sinks in Dunkirk is a boat that is sinking. I think that just adds to the enjoyment of the movie. He uses digital to enhance and complement only where he needs to.
Its funny how its in the zeitgeist.
When they did test screenings of the film for different audiences, would you believe that, not only in America but also in England, very few people knew the story of how close we came?
Churchill knew this, almost like a prophet. He could see that technology was influencing weaponry. There is an essay he wrote in 1924 called Shall We All Commit Suicide? In it, he wrote, Death stands at attention, obedient, expectant, ready to serve, ready to shear away the peoples en masse. And after the war, he said about the nuclear arms race, All you are going to do is make the rubble bounce. There was no hope in it. Despite his best efforts, we still had the war.
He had a great relationship with the public. He was very honest and very up-front. Churchill said in a speech, We have before us many, many long months of struggle and of suffering. Hes not saying that there wont be enough bananas on the table; hes telling the people that this is going to be very ugly. And the people loved him for that. I heard a story once that at a gathering of former British prime ministers, the conversation came around to Churchill, and there was a Churchill scholar among the group. One of these prime ministers?I dont know who it was?said, Who wrote Churchills speeches? And the scholar said, Well, he did. And this ex- prime minister said, How on earth could he have written his own speeches? How could he possibly have had the time? And the scholar said, Its probably not the answer you want to hear?he was a genius. He was just one of those incredibly gifted people who had an amazing brain.
Ive never heard it put so well.
