The war on terror, in a sense, began in this room, began in this cabin where your Cabinet meeting was held. Back then the whole country was with you. And now you seem to have lost them. Why do you think so?
Most Americans at this point in time don't believe in this war in Iraq. They want you to get us out of there.
You actually thought about that?
You think the whole region could be in play? Iraq, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait?
Instability in Iraq threatens the entire region?
But wasn't it your administration that created the instability in Iraq?
It's much more unstable now, Mr. President.
You mention mistakes having been made in your speech. What mistakes are you talking about?
The troop levels . . .
Could have been a mistake?
Fair to say there are not enough American troops on the ground to provide security for Iraq?
Do you think you owe the Iraqi people an apology for not doing a better job?
Well, that the United States did not do a better job in providing security after the invasion.
Americans wonder whether . . .
You are gambling a lot, Mr. President, on the [Iraqi] Prime Minister [Nouri] al-Maliki. Why do you think that's a gamble worth making?
Let's be blunt. You're a plain speaker. Let's be blunt. What have you told Maliki he has to do?
Is Muqtada al-Sadr an enemy of the United States?
I was on the battlefield in Najaf when al-Sadr's people killed your United States Marines.
Is Muqtada al-Sadr an enemy of the United States?
Without al-Sadr, there's no Maliki government.
You don't fear that al-Sadr's actually running the show?
Did you see the video of Saddam Hussein's . . .
. . . execution?
What did you think when you saw that?
I wonder if there was also some sense of satisfaction. You've had this guy in your sights for a long time.
I'm curious. How did you see the video?
You called it up on the internet and watched it?
Well, you keep saying "parts of it." What do you mean you didn't wanna watch the whole thing?
You didn't wanna see him go through the trapdoor.
Do you believe that the House has the constitutional authority to prevent you from the troop build-up? Can they stop you?
That would be one . . .
The Democrat leadership says, "We wanna support the troops who are on the ground. We just wanna redline the extra 20,000."
There's no Democrat plan.
Do you believe as commander-in-chief you have the authority to put the troops in there no matter what the Congress wants to do?
You know better than I do that many Americans feel that your administration has not been straight with the country, has not been honest. To those people you say what?
Well, sir . . .
No weapons of mass destruction.
No credible connection between 9/11 and Iraq.
The Office of Management and Budget said this war would cost somewhere between $50 billion and $60 billion and now we're over 400.
The perception, sir, more than any one of those points, is that the administration has not been straight with . . .
You seem to be saying that you may have been wrong but you weren't dishonest.
When was it that you first found out or it dawned on you that, indeed, there were no weapons of mass destruction? And I wonder, did you think, "What have I done?"
You had to be angry as hell.
What should the American people look for in this war plan? When will they know whether it's working or not?
We'll know in weeks?
Your military officers say that Iranian agents today are killing American troops on the ground in Iraq. Is that an act of war on the part of Iran against the United States?
Is that an act of war against the United States on the part of the Iranian government?
What would you say right now in this interview to the Iranian president about the meddling in Iraq?
I wonder if you feel like you've been ill-served by your Cabinet members, [Defense Secretary] Mr. [Donald] Rumsfeld, perhaps even Vice-President [Dick] Cheney. Wrong on WMD. Wrong on the connection between 9/11 and Iraq. And now you're in a fix. And I wonder if you look back and wonder who let you down.
The vice-president suggested there was a connection, not necessarily 9/11, but certainly to al-Qaeda.
Yes, sir.
Vice-president involved in these war plans?
As much as he ever has been?
Final question. How can you escalate the war when so many people in this country seem to be against it?
