Brittany: So, Gustavo, have a seat! It's nice to meet you.

Gustavo: Wonderful to meet you too, Brittany. Your office is great. What a view!

Brittany: Thank you! I look out the window when my brain is too full and it calms me down.

Gustavo: How long has the company been headquartered here?

Brittany: We moved into this building in 2012 when our old building downtown got too crowded.

Gustavo: I've  been reading about the company. It's quite a story!

Brittany: It's a great story and we're having a lot of fun. Of course, every organization has its challenges! Let's get into your questions for me. I'm eager to hear them!

Gustavo: For sure. You're looking for a Payroll Supervisor, and that's my experience. I'm curious. Why do you need a Payroll Supervisor? Do you process the payroll in-house?

Brittany: No, we use ADP for our payroll, but because we have people all over the country and we also employ people seasonally, we end up having more payroll issues and projects than perhaps other companies our size do. The title is Supervisor, and there is one employee in the Payroll department, who is a mix of clerical and IT-focused if that makes sense. You'd be responsible for making sure the payroll is processed correctly including withholding, commissions, W-2s at the end of the year -- the whole enchilada.

Gustavo: And so the person who works in the payroll department now ...?

Brittany: That is Monica, and later in this interviewing process you will meet her if it makes sense and we are all moving along together. Monica is an ace but she is not interested in running our payroll process. She is a wizard at creating reports, using our HRIS and analyzing payroll data. This role is a lot more involved with our relationship with ADP and our department managers as well as our employees and of course, the HR staff.

Gustavo: Can you tell me about how the HR department is organized?

Brittany: Definitely! I'm the Director of HR. I report to our CEO, Mike Chambers, and I'm responsible for HR, Payroll, Training and Administration. There are seven of us in the department all together -- this new Payroll Supervisor, Monica, me, two HR Generalists, one Training person and one Administration person who works with our department admins and receptionists.

Those folks are not in the HR department but we work very closely together. Of course, we work closely with Finance too, and as we go forward in this process our CFO, Geeta, will be part of the interviewing team for this position.

Gustavo: So would it be fair to say that as Payroll positions go, this one is very HR-focused?

Brittany: That's exactly right. Geeta and I agreed that we wanted Payroll in HR because it's an employee service function to us. The point of running the payroll as far as we're concerned is to make sure that people get paid correctly and on time and that their questions get answered. Of course we work hand-in-hand with Finance but apart from expense reimbursements, our Finance folks don't work as closely with our team as we do in HR.

Gustavo: Great. That really helps. Can you tell me about the major issues you're facing in Payroll?

Brittany: Well, we're doing great with ADP who also handles our HRIS, but like I said we have employees coming and going quite often, because we hire for seasonal roles in our centers around the country and here in our office, we process the payroll for all of them. We have people working in fourteen states so there are all kinds of state requirements to deal with.

There's long-distance communication with employees we seldom talk to about other HR issues, although we try to be open and available to everyone. So the payroll connection to those remote employees and even to our teammates here is incredibly important. It's the number one way they connect with HR and vice versa. As you know, not every Payroll department in the world is viewed as an employee-service function.

Gustavo (with a chuckle): That is true. I like the idea of being available to employees. When I was at Acme Explosives, I held monthly lunchtime meetings where people could come and ask questions about payroll. You wouldn't think anyone would come but they did, because they wanted to understand their deductions and 401(k) matching and so on -- all kinds of things. I brought up topics and explained them, things like garnishing payroll and other sometimes-sticky topics so that no one should be embarrassed to have to ask.

That reminds me -- you went through the staff roster and their roles but you didn't mention benefits. How do you handle employee benefits?

Brittany: There is a person in Finance named Nancy who works with our benefits providers. I'm glad you mentioned that because she  would be an important person to you and vice versa if you come to work here. Our two HR Generalists work with the employees on their benefits issues but everything is administered outside, by our benefits partners.

Gustavo: And is there a benefits hotline or online portal for your employees to get benefits answers from?

Brittany: Definitely. One fun thing we do is that our two Generalists and our Administrative person, Gretchen, come up with lots of ideas for new 'soft' benefits for our employees all the time -- like discounts at local restaurants, free tickets to local performances and so on. We have a very wide-reaching definition for "benefits," way beyond health and 401(k) and so on. We figure that  having 350 employees in one building has got to give us some clout that we can use for our employees' benefit!

Gustavo: So there must be deductions from paychecks for some of those benefit plans --

Brittany: Yes, and luckily a lot of that is automated. Tell me about your plans -- why this is a good next opportunity for you?

Gustavo: I ran a Payroll department from 2002 to 2011 for the City of Townsville. They outsourced their payroll process completely in 2011 and I started consulting, but I missed being on a team. I learned a tremendous amount consulting, so that was great. I took a contract job running the payroll for the Townsville Shakespeare Festival for two years but it was quite a placeholder job, in that there are no plans to grow the staff size or update the processes or innovate in HR and that makes sense for the Festival organization, but of course there wasn't a lot of challenge for me.

I was interested in this opportunity when I heard about it at the Payroll Managers Association meeting because of your growth and your innovative approach to HR. You have a great reputation!

Brittany: That's great to hear and I will also "Back atcha" because several HR people I know have recommended you to me.

Gustavo: Glad to hear that! Can I ask you a question about your plans for growth in headcount?

Brittany: Yes, we have 350 people here now and another 400 spread out across the country. We have a Regional Operations Manager named Bruno who reports to our Director of Regional Operations but wears an HR hat, too. He is the de facto HR generalist chief for our folks in the regions and there are Operations people in each of our 15 offices who sit in on our HR meetings and function as generalists, part-time. You'd be working closely with those folks, too.

We plan to add another 100 people in the next year.

Gustavo: Only because I've been through growth-and-contraction cycles before, I wonder, will any of that hiring be contingent or will everybody be on the payroll?

Brittany: That's a brilliant question and a topic we talk about all the time. It's a double-edged sword. We want to make the commitment to people that they are fully part of the team and entitled to employee benefits and everything that comes with full-time employment, but as you say, nothing is certain and we don't want to be in a headcount reduction situation if we can possibly avoid it. We hire very conservatively here. Everybody is stretched thin and we also hire temps and interns, much more freely than we do full-time employees, to cover the gaps.

Gustavo: And of course those people are paid through temp firms.

Brittany: Yes, but they still participate in some of the things we do for fun here while they're on the team on a temporary basis. They are our principal source for new hires, also.

Gustavo: Fantastic! And how do you view pay ranges? Is there a philosophical point of view on that?

Brittany: We don't have formal pay ranges. They are too many variables even between two people who perform the same roles. Our Administrative person Gretchen does our EEO reporting and she makes sure that people are not unfairly paid based on their EEO status but we pay people based on their role, its impact, their experience, and what the market dictates for their qualifications. Over time we reward people who do an outstanding job. We don't have a pre-set annual increase schedule. Our managers budget for salary increases and when their budgets are approved, they negotiate salary increases with each person.

Gustavo: Negotiate? Can you tell me more about that?

Brittany: It's a negotiation. We collaborate with our teammates on everything, so a manager is not going to say "Here's your raise -- end of conversation!" They have already started to talk about the next year's compensation before the new year arrives. Sometimes people don't get a pay raise and they understand why. It's not that we don't value them but the role may not warrant a pay raise and in that case, if there is a step-up role available we try to give them a crack at it.

Sometimes people leave us because of pay issues and we understand that. Our voluntary turnover is about three percent per year and we have almost no involuntary turnover, because we hire people very carefully.

Gustavo: Apart from the temp firms, what are the other principal sources for your new hires?

Brittany: Temp firms and employee referrals are our two biggest sources. We pay bonuses between $100 and $500 for new hires that our employees bring us, once they stay three months. After that it's job ads and word of mouth.

Gustavo: What would you like to know about me and my background?

Brittany: I'd like to know more about how you would interface with our regions, for starters. You talked about those  lunchtime meetings and that sounds great. Our two HR Generalists and our regional Operations folks who double as HR people would be interested in anything educational that will give our employees more of the information they want. Can you suggest some ways that you'd build a bridge between our headquarters office and our regions, where people are often on a bonus plan and a commission plan on top of their salary?